Qualcomm AI Engine Direct - Add JIT document. (#7789)
google-ai-edge/LiteRT: litert/vendors/qualcomm/doc/HTP_INSTRUCTIONS.md

Reviewer: Need to choose skel/stub by ${SOC_MODEL}

Reviewer: ```suggestion
adb shell "export LD_LIBRARY_PATH=${TEST_FOLDER} && export ADSP_LIBRARY_PATH=${TEST_FOLDER} && cd ${TEST_FOLDER} && ./run_model --graph=${COMPILED_MODEL_PATH} --dispatch_library_dir=${TEST_FOLDER}"
```

You can use `--helpfull` to find all Qualcomm options and descriptions. For example, we execute a model on Android device with burst mode via HTP
Backend:
```

Reviewer: Choose skel/stub by $SOC_MODEL.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
adb shell "export LD_LIBRARY_PATH=${TEST_FOLDER} && export ADSP_LIBRARY_PATH=${TEST_FOLDER} && cd ${TEST_FOLDER} && ./run_model --graph=${COMPILED_MODEL_PATH} --dispatch_library_dir=${TEST_FOLDER}"
```

You can use `--helpfull` to find all Qualcomm options and descriptions. For example, we execute a model on Android device with burst mode via HTP
Backend:
```

# HTP Backend

This page walks through compiling a `.tflite` model for the Qualcomm HTP backend
and executing it on target hardware. The model can be compiled ahead of time on
the host (**AOT**) or compiled just in time on the device(**JIT**). The sections below
cover the following modes:

> | Mode              | Where compiled            | Recompiles each load              | Section                                          |

Reviewer 2: Should we mention that the compile here means compiling the model not the source code?

Author: Sure, added in the doc

on the device instead, see [JIT on Android](#jit-on-android) below.

Build "run_model" and required libraries on Linux host machine:

```bash
bazel build -c opt --cxxopt=--std=c++17 --nocheck_visibility --config=android_arm64 --copt=-DABSL_FLAGS_STRIP_NAMES=0 //litert/tools:run_model
bazel build -c opt --cxxopt=--std=c++17 --nocheck_visibility --config=android_arm64 --copt=-DABSL_FLAGS_STRIP_NAMES=0 //litert/vendors/qualcomm/dispatch:dispatch_api_so
```

Execute the compiled model on Android device with QNN HTP backend via adb tool.

```bash
adb push ${QAIRT}/lib/aarch64-android/libQnnSystem.so ${TEST_FOLDER}
adb push ${QAIRT}/lib/aarch64-android/libQnnHtp.so ${TEST_FOLDER}
adb push ${QAIRT}/lib/aarch64-android/libQnnHtp${HTP_ARCH}Stub.so ${TEST_FOLDER}
adb push ${QAIRT}/lib/hexagon-${HEXAGON_ARCH}/unsigned/libQnnHtp${HTP_ARCH}Skel.so ${TEST_FOLDER}
adb push ${LITERT}/bazel-bin/litert/c/libLiteRt.so ${TEST_FOLDER}
adb push ${LITERT}/bazel-bin/litert/vendors/qualcomm/dispatch/libLiteRtDispatch_Qualcomm.so ${TEST_FOLDER}
adb push ${LITERT}/bazel-bin/litert/tools/run_model ${TEST_FOLDER}
adb push ${COMPILED_MODEL_PATH} ${TEST_FOLDER}

> adb shell "export LD_LIBRARY_PATH=${TEST_FOLDER} && export ADSP_LIBRARY_PATH=${TEST_FOLDER} && cd ${TEST_FOLDER} && ./run_model --graph=${COMPILED_MODEL_PATH} --dispatch_library_dir=${TEST_FOLDER}"

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
adb shell "export LD_LIBRARY_PATH=${TEST_FOLDER} && export ADSP_LIBRARY_PATH=${TEST_FOLDER} && cd ${TEST_FOLDER} && ./run_model --graph=${TEST_FOLDER/compiled_model.tflite} --dispatch_library_dir=${TEST_FOLDER}"
```

`${LITERT}/litert/cmake_build_linux_aarch64_8275/tools/run_model`

Upload required QNN libraries, LiteRT files and compiled model from Linux
workstation to IoT device.

```bash
adb push ${QAIRT}/lib/aarch64-oe-linux-gcc11.2/libQnnSystem.so ${TEST_FOLDER}
adb push ${QAIRT}/lib/aarch64-oe-linux-gcc11.2/libQnnHtp.so ${TEST_FOLDER}
adb push ${QAIRT}/lib/aarch64-oe-linux-gcc11.2/libQnnHtp${HTP_ARCH}Stub.so ${TEST_FOLDER}
adb push ${QAIRT}/lib/hexagon-${HEXAGON_ARCH}/unsigned/libQnnHtp${HTP_ARCH}Skel.so ${TEST_FOLDER}
adb push ${LITERT}/litert/cmake_build_linux_aarch64_8275/c/libLiteRt.so
adb push ${LITERT}/litert/cmake_build_linux_aarch64_8275/vendors/qualcomm/dispatch/libLiteRtDispatch_Qualcomm.so
adb push ${LITERT}/litert/cmake_build_linux_aarch64_8275/tools/run_model
```

Upload the model compiled by previous step from Linux workstation to IoT
device - For example, need to use --soc_model QCS8300 for model compilation for
IQ-8275

```bash
adb push ${COMPILED_MODEL_PATH} ${TEST_FOLDER}
```

Execute the compiled model on IoT device with QNN HTP backend via adb tool, some
error logs for IQ-8275 execution are expected.

```bash

> adb shell "export LD_LIBRARY_PATH=${TEST_FOLDER} && export ADSP_LIBRARY_PATH=${TEST_FOLDER} && cd ${TEST_FOLDER} && ./run_model --graph=${COMPILED_MODEL_PATH} --dispatch_library_dir=${TEST_FOLDER}"

Reviewer 2: ditto

`libQnnSaver.so` must also be pushed.

```bash
adb push ${QAIRT}/lib/aarch64-android/libQnnSystem.so ${TEST_FOLDER}
adb push ${QAIRT}/lib/aarch64-android/libQnnHtp.so ${TEST_FOLDER}
adb push ${QAIRT}/lib/aarch64-android/libQnnHtpPrepare.so ${TEST_FOLDER}
adb push ${QAIRT}/lib/aarch64-android/libQnnIr.so ${TEST_FOLDER}
adb push ${QAIRT}/lib/aarch64-android/libQnnSaver.so ${TEST_FOLDER}
adb push ${QAIRT}/lib/aarch64-android/libQnnHtp${HTP_ARCH}Stub.so ${TEST_FOLDER}
adb push ${QAIRT}/lib/hexagon-${HEXAGON_ARCH}/unsigned/libQnnHtp${HTP_ARCH}Skel.so ${TEST_FOLDER}
adb push ${LITERT}/bazel-bin/litert/c/libLiteRt.so ${TEST_FOLDER}
adb push ${LITERT}/bazel-bin/litert/vendors/qualcomm/dispatch/libLiteRtDispatch_Qualcomm.so ${TEST_FOLDER}
adb push ${LITERT}/bazel-bin/litert/vendors/qualcomm/compiler/libLiteRtCompilerPlugin_Qualcomm.so ${TEST_FOLDER}
adb push ${LITERT}/bazel-bin/litert/tools/run_model ${TEST_FOLDER}
adb push ${SOURCE_MODEL_PATH} ${TEST_FOLDER}
```

#### Real JIT (no serialization)

Set `--qualcomm_enable_just_in_time` and do **not** set `--compiler_cache_dir`.
The model is compiled in memory on every load, bypassing serialization.

```bash

> adb shell "export LD_LIBRARY_PATH=${TEST_FOLDER} && export ADSP_LIBRARY_PATH=${TEST_FOLDER} && cd ${TEST_FOLDER} && ./run_model --graph=${SOURCE_MODEL_PATH} --accelerator npu --dispatch_library_dir=${TEST_FOLDER} --compiler_plugin_library_dir=${TEST_FOLDER} --qualcomm_enable_just_in_time"

Reviewer 2: ditto

```

You can use `--helpfull` to find all Qualcomm options and descriptions. For
example, we run real JIT on Android device with burst mode via HTP Backend:

```bash
adb shell "export LD_LIBRARY_PATH=/tmp/test_folder/ && export ADSP_LIBRARY_PATH=/tmp/test_folder/ && cd /tmp/test_folder/ && ./run_model --graph=./model.tflite --accelerator npu --dispatch_library_dir=/tmp/test_folder/ --compiler_plugin_library_dir=/tmp/test_folder/ --qualcomm_enable_just_in_time --iterations 50 --qualcomm_htp_performance_mode burst --qualcomm_log_level off"
```

#### On-device AOT (cached JIT)

Set both `--compiler_plugin_library_dir` (where the plugin `.so` was pushed) and
`--compiler_cache_dir` (a writable directory for the cached context binary). The
first run compiles and caches model. Subsequent runs with the same `--compiler_cache_dir`
load the cached binary and skip recompilation.

```bash

> adb shell "export LD_LIBRARY_PATH=${TEST_FOLDER} && export ADSP_LIBRARY_PATH=${TEST_FOLDER} && cd ${TEST_FOLDER} && ./run_model --graph=${SOURCE_MODEL_PATH} --accelerator npu --dispatch_library_dir=${TEST_FOLDER} --compiler_plugin_library_dir=${TEST_FOLDER} --compiler_cache_dir=${CACHE_DIR}"

Reviewer 2: ditto

# HTP Backend

This page walks through compiling a `.tflite` model for the Qualcomm HTP backend
and executing it on target hardware. The model can be compiled ahead of time on

> the host (**AOT**) or on the device at load time (**JIT**). The sections below

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the host (**AOT**) or compiled just in time on the device(**JIT**). The sections below
```

cover the following modes:

| Mode              | Where compiled            | Recompiles each load              | Section                                          |
| ----------------- | ------------------------- | --------------------------------- | ------------------------------------------------ |
| **AOT (Bazel)**   | Host (x86 Linux)          | No, compiled offline              | [AOT Flow](#aot-flow) > [Build with Bazel](#build-with-bazel) |
| **AOT (CMake)**   | Host (x86 Linux)          | No, compiled offline              | [AOT Flow](#aot-flow) > [Build with CMake](#build-with-cmake) |

> | **Real JIT**      | Device, at load time      | Yes, in memory without serialization | [JIT on Android](#jit-on-android)            |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| **Real JIT**      | Device, at load time      | Yes, in memory without serialization/cache | [JIT on Android](#jit-on-android)            |
```

| --------------------------- | ---------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| `${EXTRACTED_BYTECODE_DIR}` | [Build with CMake](#build-with-cmake) > [(Optional) Extract bytecode from compiled model for QNN Runtime](#optional-extract-bytecode-from-compiled-model-for-qnn-runtime) |
| `${ANDROID_NDK_HOME}`       | [Build with CMake](#build-with-cmake)                                  |
| `${IOT_DIR}`                | [Build with CMake](#build-with-cmake) > [Run on device (IoT device with oe-linux)](#run-on-device-iot-device-with-oe-linux) |
| `${CACHE_DIR}`              | [On-device AOT (cached JIT)](#on-device-aot-cached-jit). A writable directory on the device for the cached context binary. |

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

## AOT Flow

The model is compiled into a QNN context binary on the host (x86 Linux) ahead of
time, then the compiled `.tflite` is pushed to the device and executed. Two build
systems are supported: Bazel and CMake.

### Build with Bazel

#### Compile on host (x86 Linux)

Build "apply_plugin_main" compilation tool and compile the model on Linux

> workstation (Ubuntu-22.04).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Build "apply_plugin_main" compilation tool and compile the model on Linux
host machine.
```

bazel-bin/litert/tools/apply_plugin_main --cmd apply --libs bazel-bin/litert/vendors/qualcomm/compiler --soc_model ${SOC_MODEL} --soc_manufacturer Qualcomm --model ${SOURCE_MODEL_PATH} -o ${COMPILED_MODEL_PATH}
```

#### Run on device (Android)

This section runs the model compiled by the AOT step above. To compile the model
on the device instead, see [JIT on Android](#jit-on-android) below.

> Build "run_model" and required libraries on Linux workstation:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Build "run_model" and required libraries on Linux host machine:
```

tools/apply_plugin_main --cmd apply --libs vendors/qualcomm/compiler/ --soc_model ${SOC_MODEL} --soc_manufacturer Qualcomm --model ${SOURCE_MODEL_PATH} -o ${COMPILED_MODEL_PATH}
```

> ##### (Optional) Extract bytecode from compiled model for QNN Runtime

Reviewer: Propose to make extract bytecode as a independent section and provide both bazel and cmake instructions.

Author: Good idea, added a new section for it in the latest commit, thanks!

There are two JIT sub-modes, controlled by which flag is set:

| Sub-mode          | Flags                                                              | Serialization                                                                  |
| ----------------- | ------------------------------------------------------------------ | ------------------------------------------------------------------------------ |
| **Real JIT**      | `--compiler_plugin_library_dir` + `--qualcomm_enable_just_in_time` | Compiles in memory and **bypasses serialization**. Recompiles on every load with no cache. |
| **On-device AOT** | `--compiler_plugin_library_dir` + `--compiler_cache_dir`           | Compiles on the first run and **caches** the context binary to `--compiler_cache_dir`. Later runs load from the cache instead of recompiling. |

In both cases the model is partitioned and compiled on the device, so the NPU
accelerator must be requested via `--accelerator npu`.

### Compile on host (x86 Linux)

In addition to the `run_model` and dispatch library targets used by the AOT
flow, JIT needs the Qualcomm **compiler plugin** built for Android, since

> compilation now happens on the device.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
model compilation now happens on the device.
```

bazel build -c opt --cxxopt=--std=c++17 --nocheck_visibility --config=android_arm64 --copt=-DABSL_FLAGS_STRIP_NAMES=0 //litert/vendors/qualcomm/dispatch:dispatch_api_so
bazel build -c opt --cxxopt=--std=c++17 --nocheck_visibility --config=android_arm64 --copt=-DABSL_FLAGS_STRIP_NAMES=0 //litert/vendors/qualcomm/compiler:qnn_compiler_plugin_so
```

### Run on device (Android)

Compared with the AOT flow, JIT pushes the **original** `.tflite` model (not a
compiled one) and the compiler plugin `libLiteRtCompilerPlugin_Qualcomm.so`.
The plugin links against extra QNN libraries that the AOT runtime does not need,
so `libQnnHtpPrepare.so` (on-device graph preparation), `libQnnIr.so`, and
`libQnnSaver.so` must also be pushed.

```bash
adb push ${QAIRT}/lib/aarch64-android/libQnnSystem.so ${TEST_FOLDER}
adb push ${QAIRT}/lib/aarch64-android/libQnnHtp.so ${TEST_FOLDER}
adb push ${QAIRT}/lib/aarch64-android/libQnnHtpPrepare.so ${TEST_FOLDER}
adb push ${QAIRT}/lib/aarch64-android/libQnnIr.so ${TEST_FOLDER}
adb push ${QAIRT}/lib/aarch64-android/libQnnSaver.so ${TEST_FOLDER}
adb push ${QAIRT}/lib/aarch64-android/libQnnHtpV81Stub.so ${TEST_FOLDER}

> adb push ${QAIRT}/lib/hexagon-v81/unsigned/libQnnHtpV81Skel.so ${TEST_FOLDER}

Reviewer: Choose skel/stub by $SOC_MODEL.

Set `--qualcomm_enable_just_in_time` and do **not** set `--compiler_cache_dir`.
The model is compiled in memory on every load, bypassing serialization.

```bash
# Please use "--helpfull" to find all Qualcomm options and descriptions
adb shell "export LD_LIBRARY_PATH=${TEST_FOLDER} && export ADSP_LIBRARY_PATH=${TEST_FOLDER} && cd ${TEST_FOLDER} && ./run_model --graph=${SOURCE_MODEL_PATH} --accelerator npu --dispatch_library_dir=${TEST_FOLDER} --compiler_plugin_library_dir=${TEST_FOLDER} --qualcomm_enable_just_in_time"
```

For example, we run real JIT on Android device with burst mode via HTP Backend:

```bash
adb shell "export LD_LIBRARY_PATH=/tmp/test_folder/ && export ADSP_LIBRARY_PATH=/tmp/test_folder/ && cd /tmp/test_folder/ && ./run_model --graph=./model.tflite --accelerator npu --dispatch_library_dir=/tmp/test_folder/ --compiler_plugin_library_dir=/tmp/test_folder/ --qualcomm_enable_just_in_time --iterations 50 --qualcomm_htp_performance_mode burst --qualcomm_log_level off"
```

#### On-device AOT (cached JIT)

Set both `--compiler_plugin_library_dir` (where the plugin `.so` was pushed) and
`--compiler_cache_dir` (a writable directory for the cached context binary). The

> first run compiles and caches. Subsequent runs with the same `--compiler_cache_dir`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
first run compiles and caches model. Subsequent runs with the same `--compiler_cache_dir`
```
